# 10 Reasons For Rent Destablization
_There are many reasons why a rent stabilized unit would be de-regulated, that is, it would be removed from rent regulation laws, rent increases would no longer be regulated, and tenants would lose many other benefits as well. While there are several and some exceptions, here are three of the most common._

### (1) Expiration of J-51 or 421-a Tax Abatements and Exemptions.
In exchange for applying rent regulation benefits to their building or some of its units, the city offers tax abatements to landlords that reduce the amount of property tax they have to pay, and tax exemptions that serve as credits for taxes that are to be paid. There are two types of tax abatements/exemptions that landlords can receive if they apply for them, J-51 or 421-a. J-51 applies to either fully rehabilitated or converted units, while 421-a applies to only newly constructed units.

**J-51.** A J-51 is for units that have either been fully rehabilitated or converted from another use, like if a unit was used as an office space and now it’s someone’s apartment or if the unit was gut renovated. While tax benefit periods can vary, they are usually for 12 year for J-51 programs. Knowing the rent regulation status before the J-51 tax benefit was used by the landlord is important because not all expirations of J-51 tax benefits impact rent regulation status.

> If the building was rent-regulated before the tax benefit was applied (generally the building was built before 1974 and contains more than six apartments units), then the building will remain rent-regulated even if the tax benefits expires. So, if the unit was regulated before the J-51 tax benefits were applied, then the unit will remain rent-regulated even when the tax benefits expire for the landlord.
>
> However, if the unit became rent-regulated because the landlord took the J-51 tax abatement (generally in buildings that were constructed after 1974), then it is likely that the unit would no longer be rent-regulated when the J-51 tax benefit ends. Generally tax benefits will end when the last lease signed under the tax benefits ends. So, for example, if the J-51 program expires in June of 2016, and your lease ends in December of 2016, then the rent regulation status ends when your lease ends and the landlord can offer you or another tenant a market rate lease.

However, this depends on whether or not the landlord gave you proper notice. **Proper notice** means that the landlord included a notice in 12-point font in the original lease and all subsequent renewals that stated (1) that the unit could be deregulated when the tax abatement benefits expired and (2) included the approximate date when rent regulation coverage would expire. If the original lease and the subsequent renewals do not have such a notice, the tenant has grounds to keep the unit rent-regulated even after the tax benefits expire for the landlord.

See the [Rent Guidelines Board’s website](https://www1.nyc.gov/site/rentguidelinesboard/resources/tax-abatement-exemption-programs.page) for more information on J-51.

**421-a.** This program applies only to newly constructed units. Generally units built after 1974 are not subject to rent regulation, but have been placed under rent regulation because the landlord has chosen to take 421-a benefits. For units constructed after July 3, 1984, landlords are required to include in each lease and lease renewal proper notification (see above) both a notice that the rent regulation status will expire when the 421-a tax benefits expire, as well as the approximate date of expiration. If your lease extends beyond the date when tax benefits expire, deregulation takes effect when the last lease that was signed under the 421-a program expires (see previous example).


June 30, 2008 is an important date. If construction began before June 30, 2008, then the units remain regulated until the last lease entered into during the 421-a tax benefits period. Once that lease expires, the rent regulation also expires. However, if the landlord fails to include the proper notice (see above), then the unit is de-regulated only when that current tenant decides to leave. For units where construction began on or after June 30, 2008, remain regulated for the duration of the tax benefits (usually 35 years) and then become de-regulated only when the tenant residing in the unit when the benefits expires leaves the apartment.

See [New York State Homes and Community Renewal’s website](http://www.nyshcr.org/Rent/FactSheets/orafac41.pdf) for more information on 421-a.

**Challenging Increases.** There is generally no mechanism to stop the expiration of tax benefits, and only under some circumstances will rent regulation status remain after tax benefits have expired.
In the case of J-51, units will only remain regulated after the expiration of tax benefits if the unit was already stabilized before the landlord accepted tax benefits.

In the case of 421-a, for units in which construction began before June 30, 2008, they will only remain regulated after the expiration of tax benefits if there was not proper notification—even then it’s only until the tenant living in the unit when the benefits period expired leaves, after which they will be deregulated. For units in which construction began on or after June 30, 2008, they will only remain regulated until the tenant occupying the unit leaves, as long as there was proper notification and their leaving the unit was not the result of harassment.

You can call the Department of Housing, Preservation, and Development (HPD) at 212-863-5517 (J-51) or 212-863-5421 (421-a) to find out if your building is a part of either of these programs. Additionally, for more information about the Tax Incentive Program, visit the [Housing Preservation and Development webpage](http://www1.nyc.gov/site/hpd/developers/tax-incentives.page).

### (2) Conversion to a co-op or a condominium.
When a rent-regulated unit is converted to a co-op or condominium, there are often two possible scenarios: either (1) tenants have the option to purchase the unit themselves and either stay there or rent it out to someone else, or (2) someone else buys the unit.

If someone else buys the unit, the buyer or landlord can either (1) let the current tenant stay in their rent-regulated unit or (2) they can evict them. For 90 days after the final offering for a co-op is determined, the tenants in a rent-regulated unit have an option to buy or purchase their share and the unit cannot be shown to prospective buyers. If a new tenant moves into a vacant unit that has been converted, they will no long be covered by rent regulation laws.

- Under an **eviction plan,** tenants cannot be evicted by the purchaser of a co-op or a condominium unit for a minimum of three years after the eviction plan goes into effect. If their lease expires before the three years is up, they are offered another lease that will end when the minimum three years are up. The new lease must be under the same terms as their original lease as rent-regulated tenant.

- Under a **non-eviction plan,** tenants cannot be evicted and are will remain in their units as rent-regulated tenants.

For more information, see the [Coop/Condo Conversion Handbook](https://ag.ny.gov/sites/default/files/pdfs/bureaus/real_estate_finance/Co-Op%20Condo%20Conversion%20Booklet.pdf).

### (3) High-Rent-Vacancy and High-Rent High-Income Deregulation.
There are two ways to deregulate protected units: if the unit reaches a high-rent threshold and then is vacant, or if the unit reaches a high-rent threshold and if the tenant crosses a high-income threshold.

**High-Rent Vacancy deregulation** occurs when a unit exceeds its legal monthly rent threshold. As of January 1, 2018, the legal Deregulation Rent Threshold (DRT) is the rent is $2,733.75, and increases each year in accordance with the 1-Year lease increases as approved by the Rent Guidelines Board. Be sure to check the current DRT level, as it changes each year. Once the rent for a unit reaches the legal DRT, the apartment becomes deregulated upon vacancy. Units that are receiving certain tax benefits like 421-a or J-51 are not eligible for High-Rent Vacancy as long as the tax benefits are being received.

For more information, see [page 2 of the Tenant’s Rights Guide](https://ag.ny.gov/sites/default/files/tenants_rights.pdf).

There is some debate about how a unit can be deregulated using the high-rent vacancy regulation. As has generally been practiced, if the high rent threshold is reached **during vacancy,** it would be deregulated before a new lease was given to a new tenant. The Altman Ruling has challenged that interpretation, arguing that the deregulation threshold must be reached **when the unit is occupied,** and that it should be deregulated when the current resident leaves and a new lease is begun. However, it is still unclear whether this interpretation will be upheld in courts—some housing experts have their doubts.

There are two important ways that landlords can legally raise rents in rent-regulated apartments aside from the allowable rent increases allowed by the Rent Guideline Board.

- **First,** is what is called a vacancy increase. In between leases, the landlord is entitled to increase the legal allowable rent by a certain percentage, that is, when one tenant leaves a unit and another moves in, the landlord is allowed to charge a rent increase during to vacancy. These vary depending on the length of lease that the new tenant chosen for their lease, but are usually somewhere between a 16 and 20 percent increase—which can add up.

- **Second,** landlords can pass off costs of improvements that they have made either to the building (Major Capital Improvements) or the apartment (Individual Apartment Improvements).  Combining these two increases is a common way for landlords to reach the DRT, and since there is little verification by any state agency, many rent-regulated apartments in New York City are often illegally deregulated.

**The High-Rent Vacancy Deregulation Process.** When the high rent threshold is met, two documents from the New York State Homes and Community Renewal (HRC) are involved: (1) an HRC HRVD-N and (2) an HRC annual apartment registration. The first document must either be provided at the signing of the new lease or be sent by certified mail to the new tenant within 30 days of when new tenancy commences or when the new lease has been signed by both parties. This document shows the last regulated rent, the reason for the deregulation, and how the new rent was calculated. It must also contain a statement that the tenant can verify the last legal regulated rent or maximum rent by contacting HRC.

The second form is a HCR annual apartment registration and must be filed with HRC. It indicates the unit’s status as permanently exempt from rent regulation laws and when the deregulation will take affect—generally on the April 1st following the deregulation filing. It must be sent to the first tenant within 30 days after the tenancy commences or the filing of the registration with HRC, whichever occurs later.

**High-Rent High-Income deregulation** occurs when the apartment has reached the Deregulation Rent Threshold (DRT) as listed above and the landlord can establish that the tenants living in the apartment have a “total annual federal adjusted gross income” that exceeds $200,000 for each of the preceding two calendar years. This method of deregulation would be used to deregulate a unit in which the high-rent threshold has been met, but the tenant isn’t planning on leaving anytime soon. If a landlord can establish that the tenants living in the unit have a combined income of more than $200,000 for the previous two calendar years, then they can permanently deregulate the unit. Units that are receiving certain tax benefits like 421-a or J-51 are not eligible for High-Rent High-Income as long as the tax benefits are being received. Additionally, units that have tenants with Senior Citizen Rent Increase Exemptions (SCRIE) or a Disability Rent Increase Exemptions (DRIE) will not be considered for deregulation.

> “Annual income” refers to the federal adjusted gross income as reported on the New York State Income Tax return, and “total annual income” refers to the sum of the annual incomes of all persons who occupy the apartment as their primary residence on other than a temporary basis. The annual incomes of employees of residents or sublettors is not included in the calculation, but rather the prime tenants. If the unit is leased by a corporation, their annual income is not considered.

**The High-Rent High-Income Deregulation Process.** This is somewhat more of a complicated process then the High-Rent Vacancy process, specifically, there are important dates before which paperwork must be filed.

**On or before May 1** of each year, the landlord can file an Income Certification Form (ICF) if and only if the apartment has reached the DRT. Tenants are required to certify whether the household’s total annual income was in excess of $200,000—considering only the individuals referenced in the ICF—for each of the two preceding calendar years. The ICF does not require disclosure of any income information other than whether the threshold for each of the two preceding years has been met. It must notify tenants of their protection against harassment and must be delivered either by certified or first class mail or in person. The tenant(s) must return the ICF to the owner within 30 days after service.
If the tenant has certified that their incomes exceeded $200,000 for the two previous calendar years, the landlord must file an Owner’s Petition for Deregulation (OPD) with HCR no later than June 30, which will request that no longer be subject to rent regulation upon expiration of the existing lease (rent stabilized apartment), or as of March 1 in the year next succeeding the filing of the OPD (rent controlled apartment).

If the tenant fails to return the ICF with 30 days after they have received it, or if the landlords disputes it, the landlord can file an OPD no later than June 30. The tenant will then have 60 days to submit the required information to the Department of Taxation and Finance (DTF) and HCR, failure to do so could result in an order to deregulate the unit. If DTF notifies HCR that it has determined that the total annual income was in excess of the threshold amount for each of the two preceding years, then HCR will notify the owner and tenants of the results of such determination, and both parties will have 30 days to comment. When the comment period expires, HCR will issue their order, which will be that the apartment is (1) still subject to rent regulation, (2) will be deregulated when the current lease expires, (3) will be deregulated as of March 1 in the year next succeeding the filing of the OPD for rent controlled apartments.

See [Fact Sheet 36](http://www.nyshcr.org/Rent/FactSheets/orafac36.htm) for more information in Vacancy Deregulation **[Note: This is an old version, current version under revision].**


For more information, on rent increases, see [Fact Sheet #26](http://www.nyshcr.org/Rent/FactSheets/orafac26.pdf).
